As we've seen both Series and
DataFrames can have
indices applied to them.
The index is essentially
a row-level label and
in Pandas the rows
correspond to axis zero.
Indices can either
be autogenerated,
such as when we created
a new Series without an index,
in which case we get
a numeric value,
or they can be set explicitly,
like when we use
the dictionary object
to create the Series,
or when we load data from
the CSV file and set
appropriate parameters.
Another option for setting
an index is to use the
set_index function.
This function takes
a list of columns
and promotes those
columns to an index.
In this lecture,
we'll explore more
about how indexes work in Pandas.
The set_index function is
a destructive process,
and it doesn't keep
the current index.
If you want to keep
the current index,
you need to manually
create a new column and
copy into it values from
the index attribute.
So let's import Pandas in
our admissions dataset.
So import Pandas as pd.
We'll create a new DataFrame,
df equals pd.read_csv
datasets/Admissions_Predict.csv,
and we'll set the index
column to zero,
and let's look at
the head of this.
So let's say that
we don't want to
index the DataFrame
by serial numbers,
but instead by
chance of admission.
But let's assume we want to keep
the serial number for later.
So let's preserve the
serial number in a new column.
We can do this using
the indexing operator
on the string that
has the column label,
then we can use
the set index to set
the index of the column
to the chance of admit.
So we copy the indexed data
into its own column,
so df sub 'Serial
Number" equals df.index.
So we just make a copy of that
into a column that we've
labeled serial number,
then we set the index
to another column.
So df equals df.set_index
'Chance of Admit' and df.head.
You'll see that when
we create a new index
from an existing column
the index has a name,
which is the original name
of the column.
We can get rid of
the index completely by
calling the function reset_index.
This promotes the index
into a column,
and creates a default
numbered index.
So df equals df.reset_index,
and then df.head,
and we see that
Chance of Admit is
now promoted back into a column,
and we have a numeric index.
One nice feature of Pandas
is multi-level indexing.
This is similar to
composite keys in
relational database systems.
To create a multi-level index,
we simply call set_index
and give it a list
of columns that we're interested
in promoting to an index.
Pandas will search
through these in order,
finding the distinct data
and form composite indexes
A good example of this is often
found when dealing with
geographical data,
which is sorted by
regions or demographics.
Let's change data sets,
and look at some census data
for a better example.
This data is stored in
the file census.csv.
It comes from the United
States Census Bureau.
In particular, this
is a breakdown of
the population level data
in the US county level.
It's a great example of
how different kinds of
data sets might be formatted
when you're trying to clean them.
So let's import and see
what the data looks like.
So df equals pd.read_ csv,
and from data sets census.csv,
and we'll look at the head.
In this data set, there
are two summarized levels;
one that contains summary data
for the whole country,
and one that contains
summary data for each state.
I want to see a list of
all the unique values
in a given column.
In this DataFrame, we see
that the possible values for
the sum level are using
the unique function
of the DataFrame.
This is similar to
the SQL distinct operator.
So here, we can run
unique on the sum level
of our current DataFrame.
So df, and we'll just project our
SUMLEV and .unique to see
the unique values there.
So we see that there's actually
only two different
values; 40 and 50.
Let's exclude all of the rows
that are summaries
at the state level,
and just keep the county data.
So I'll override our DataFrame,
df equals df sub,
and we'll want to do that where
df sub 'SUMLEV' is equal to 50,
and let's look at
the head of that.
Also, while this data set is
interesting for a number
of different reasons,
let's reduce the data
that we're going to look
at to just the total
population estimates,
and the total number of births.
We can do this by
creating a list of
column names that we want
to keep then project
those and assign
the resulting DataFrame
to our df variable.
So columns to keep,
and we'll write STNAME,
CTYNAME, BIRTHS for 2010, 2011,
-12, 13, 2014-15, and
then our POPESTIMATES for 10,
11, 12, 13, 14, and 15.
So our DataFrame is just
DataFrames sub columns_to_keep,
and let's look at
the head of that.
So smaller DataFrames,
still plenty big.
The US Census data breaks down
population estimates by
both state and county.
We can load the data
and set the index to be
a combination of the state
and county values,
and see how Pandas handles
it in a DataFrame.
We do this by creating a list of
the column identifiers that
we want to make up the index,
and then calling
set_index with this list,
and assigning the output
as appropriate.
We can have a dual index,
so first the state name,
and second the county name.
So DataFrame equals df.set_index,
and then I'm going to
pass it a list,
and I want to have
first the state name,
and then the county name,
and let's look at
the head of that.
That's a nice
rendering as well of
how the counties are kept
within the state there.
The immediate question
which comes up is
how we can query this DataFrame.
We saw previously that
the loc attribute of
the DataFrame can take
multiple arguments,
and it could query
both the row and the columns.
When you use a MultiIndex,
you must provide the arguments in
order by the level
you wish to query.
Inside of the index,
each column is called a level and
the outermost column
is level zero.
So if I wanted to see
the population results
from Washtenaw County
in Michigan the State
which is where I live,
the first argument
would be Michigan
and the second would
be Washtenaw County.
So df.loc sub 'Michigan',
'Washtenaw County'.
If you are interested in
comparing two counties,
for example, Washtenaw
and Wayne County,
we can pass a list
of tuples describing
the indices that we wish to
query into the loc attribute.
Since we have a MultiIndex
of two values,
the state and the county,
we need to provide two values as
each element of
our filtering list.
Each tuple should
have two elements,
the first element
being the first index,
and the second element
being the second index.
In this case, we
want to have a list
of two tuples, in each tuple,
the first element is Michigan,
and the second element is
either Washtenaw County,
or Wayne County.
So df.loc and remember
we use the set operator,
or the indexing operator on loc,
and then we actually create
a list inside there,
and the first is the tuple
Michigan and Washtenaw County,
and the second is the tuple
Michigan and Wayne County.
So that's how hierarchical
indices work in a nutshell.
They're a special part of
the Pandas library which I
think can make management and
reasoning about data easier.
Of course, hierarchical labeling
isn't just for rows.
For example, you can
transpose this matrix,
and now have hierarchical
column labels.
Projecting a single
column which has
these labels works
exactly the way
that you would expect it to.
Now, in reality, I don't tend to
use hierarchical
indices very much,
instead just keep everything as
columns and manipulate those.
But it's a unique and
sophisticated aspect
of Pandas that's useful to know,
especially if viewing
your data in a tabular form.